CHAPTER SIX—LEADERSHIP AND INTEGRITY
Responsibilities of leadership.
73. (1) Authority assigned to a State officer—
(a) is a public trust to be exercised in a manner that—
(i) is consistent with the purposes and objects of this
Constitution;
(ii) demonstrates respect for the people;
(iii) brings honour to the nation and dignity to the office; and
(iv) promotes public confidence in the integrity of the office;
and
(b) vests in the State officer the responsibility to serve the people,
rather than the power to rule them.
(2) The guiding principles of leadership and integrity include—
(a) selection on the basis of personal integrity, competence and
suitability, or election in free and fair elections;
(b) objectivity and impartiality in decision making, and in ensuring
that decisions are not influenced by nepotism, favouritism,
other improper motives or corrupt practices;
(c) selfless service based solely on the public interest,
demonstrated by—
(i) honesty in the execution of public duties; and
(ii) the declaration of any personal interest that may conflict
with public duties;
(d) accountability to the public for decisions and actions; and
(e) discipline and commitment in service to the people.
47
Constitution of Kenya, 2010
Oath of office of State officers.
74. Before assuming a State office, acting in a State office, or
performing any functions of a State office, a person shall take and
subscribe the oath or affirmation of office, in the manner and form
prescribed by the Third Schedule or under an Act of Parliament.
Conduct of State officers.
75. (1) A State officer shall behave, whether in public and official
life, in private life, or in association with other persons, in a manner
that avoids—
(a) any conflict between personal interests and public or official
duties;
(b) compromising any public or official interest in favour of a
personal interest; or
(c) demeaning the office the officer holds.
(2) A person who contravenes clause (1), or Article 76, 77 or 78
(2)—
(a) shall be subject to the applicable disciplinary procedure for
the relevant office; and
(b) may, in accordance with the disciplinary procedure referred to
in paragraph (a), be dismissed or otherwise removed from
office.
(3) A person who has been dismissed or otherwise removed from
office for a contravention of the provisions specified in clause (2) is
disqualified from holding any other State office.
Financial probity of State officers.
76. (1) A gift or donation to a State officer on a public or official
occasion is a gift or donation to the Republic and shall be delivered to
the State unless exempted under an Act of Parliament.
(2) A State officer shall not—
(a) maintain a bank account outside Kenya except in accordance
with an Act of Parliament; or
(b) seek or accept a personal loan or benefit in circumstances
that compromise the integrity of the State officer.
Restriction on activities of State officers.
77. (1) A full-time State officer shall not participate in any other
 Constitution of Kenya, 2010
gainful employment.
(2) Any appointed State officer shall not hold office in a political
party.
(3) A retired State officer who is receiving a pension from public
funds shall not hold more than two concurrent remunerative positions
as chairperson, director or employee of—
(a) a company owned or controlled by the State; or
(b) a State organ.
(4) A retired State officer shall not receive remuneration from
public funds other than as contemplated in clause (3).
Citizenship and leadership.
78. (1) A person is not eligible for election or appointment to a
State office unless the person is a citizen of Kenya.
(2) A State officer or a member of the defence forces shall not
hold dual citizenship.
(3) Clauses (1) and (2) do not apply to—
(a) judges and members of commissions; or
(b) any person who has been made a citizen of another country
by operation of that country’s law, without ability to opt out.
Legislation to establish the ethics and anti-corruption
commission.
79. Parliament shall enact legislation to establish an independent
ethics and anti-corruption commission, which shall be and have the
status and powers of a commission under Chapter Fifteen, for
purposes of ensuring compliance with, and enforcement of, the
provisions of this Chapter.
Legislation on leadership.
80. Parliament shall enact legislation—
(a) establishing procedures and mechanisms for the effective
administration of this Chapter;
(b) prescribing the penalties, in addition to the penalties referred
to in Article 75, that may be imposed for a contravention of
this Chapter;
49
Constitution of Kenya, 2010
(c) providing for the application of this Chapter, with the
necessary modifications, to public officers; and
(d) making any other provision necessary for ensuring the
promotion of the principles of leadership and integrity referred
to in this Chapter, and the enforcement of this Chapter